# Lesson 3: Quadratic Muscle Recruitment

{{ caution_old_tutorial }}

The simple example of the previous lesson was enough to show us that
linear muscle recruitment is not going to mimic the physiological
behavior of living bodies very well. The next logical step would be to
try a quadratic criterion, which we can formulate like this:

$$
G=\sum_i \left( \frac{f_i}{N_i} \right)^2
$$

Compared with the linear criterion from the previous lesson, a quadratic
criterion penalizes large terms in the sum, so it is likely that this
would distribute the load between several muscles rather than recruiting
only a minimum number of them.

Quadratic muscle recruitment is often used in the biomechanical
literature and many scientists support this method. Its muscle
recruitment often agree well with experimental measurements of muscle
activity and the resulting joint reaction forces have also been shown in
several cases to agree well with experimental data. Physically, the
method is related to well-known concepts such as the root mean square of
a series of numbers and also to the field of elasticity. It is a fact
that, had the muscles been purely linear passive-elastic elements
capable of pushing as well as pulling, then the force distribution over
the muscles would become quadratic, owing to the fact that the elastic
energy stored in a muscle would be a quadratic function of the force it
carries.

Before we try it out, let us set up a model that makes more
physiological sense than the previous one. Please {download}`download and savethis zip file <Downloads/Bike2D.zip>` and unpack it into some working
directory. Then open AnyBody and load the file Bike2D.main.any. After
you have compiled the model into memory you can open up a Model View
window and see this picture:

![Model view Bike 2D](_static/lesson3/image2.png)

This is a simple two-dimensional model of two legs pedaling a bicycle,
but it captures many of the complexities of muscle recruitment in real
biological systems: closed kinematic chains, muscle redundancy, changing
moment arms, changing force magnitudes and directions.

In the editor window containing Bike2d.main.any, scroll down to the
bottom of the file where you find the study section. This study has no
particular settings, but a few additional lines will define a quadratic
criterion:

```AnyScriptDoc
// The study: Operations to be performed on the model
AnyBodyStudy Study = {
  AnyFolder &Model = .Model;
  Gravity = {0.0, -9.81, 0.0};
  tEnd = Main.BikeParameters.T;
  nStep = 100;
  §InverseDynamics.Criterion = {
    Type = MR_Quadratic;
    UpperBoundOnOff = Off;
  };§
};
```

Now reload the model, expand the study tree in the Operation window on
the left hand side of the mainframe, pick InverseDynamics by clicking it
once and click the Run button. This should start the analysis and the
bicycle starts running the in Model View window.

After the analysis is completed, click Window->ChartFX to open a window
where we can examine graphs. Navigate in the tree on the left hand side
of the window through Study, Output, Model, Leg2D, Right, Mus, and
expand the branch for one of the muscles, for instance Ham, which is the
hamstring muscle. You will find Activity among the properties that can
be plotted. Select it and then replace the muscle name by an asterisk to
simultaneously plot the activities of all the muscles.

![Chart view Right muscle activity 400W](_static/lesson3/image3.gif)

Muscle activity in AnyBody is defined as the *f*/*N* property that we
minimized as a square sum over all the muscles. In other words, muscle
activity is a measure of the force in a muscle relative to its strength.
The resulting graphs show that Several muscles are active simultaneously
and that they are active to different degrees as the movement
progresses. If you hold the mouse over each of the curves a little
window will pop up and tell you the name of the muscle. The green curve
that peaks in the beginning of the cycle, for instance, is the vasti
muscles, i.e. the large muscles on the frontal side of the thigh.

You can also see that the maximum muscle activity is around 0.78, i.e.
78 percent. The advantage of plotting activities is that a given muscle
is loaded to its maximum strength when its activity is 100 percent. This
is also called Maximum Voluntary Contraction, or MVC.

So the graphs show that this is a rather strenuous pedaling activity.
The reason is obvious if you look further up in the Bike2D.main.any
file. Near the top of the file, a number of parameters are available for
the user to set:

```AnyScriptDoc
// Kinematic parameters
AnyVar Cadence = 60.0; //Cadence in RPM
AnyVar MechOutput = 400; //Average Mechanical output over a cycle in Watt
```

The mechanical output has been set to 400 W at a cadence of only 60 rpm
and this will require most of the strength of the rider.

Try increasing the load to 600 W, reload the model, rerun the analysis,
and plot the muscle activities again. Now you should get the following
picture:

![Chart view Right muscle activity 600W](_static/lesson3/image4.gif)

The recruitment pattern is very similar to the previous one, but the
recruitment of the vasti as well as the hamstrings now exceeds 100
percent. This is obviously not physiologically possible, and muscle
recruitment with a quadratic criterion therefore usually has an
additional constraint defined, requiring the activation of the muscles
not to exceed 100 percent. We can switch this constraint on by placing
double slashes in front of a line in the definition of the quadratic
criterion:

```AnyScriptDoc
// The study: Operations to be performed on the model
AnyBodyStudy Study = {
  AnyFolder &Model = .Model;
  Gravity = {0.0, -9.81, 0.0};
  tEnd = Main.BikeParameters.T;
  nStep = 100;
  InverseDynamics.Criterion = {
    Type = MR_Quadratic;
    §//§ UpperBoundOnOff = Off;
  };
};
```

Now, please reload, rerun and replot. The result should be the
following:

![Chart view Right muscle activity Upper bound On](_static/lesson3/image5.gif)

This is significantly different from what we had before. The activities
beyond 100 percent have been cut off, and the submaximally activated
muscles increase their activation to balance the external load.

The fact that we initially had to explicitly define UpperBoundOnOff =
Off shows that the standard setting of the Quadratic is to have the
bound on. This makes physiological sense. The figure right above shows
that it is in fact possible for the organism to carry the load without
overloading the muscles, so a solution like the previous one that
predicts that the organism cannot carry the load is not satisfactory.

Of course, the organism does have an upper limit to how much load it can
carry. Let us investigate what happens when we increase the load further
to 800 W:

```AnyScriptDoc
// Kinematic parameters
AnyVar Cadence = 60.0; //Cadence in RPM
AnyVar MechOutput = §800§; //Average Mechanical output over a cycle in Watt
```

Reloading and rerunning produces this result:

![Chart view Right muscle activity 800W](_static/lesson3/image6.gif)

As the model runs, you will receive a warning: “Overloaded muscle
configuration.” This is AnyBody’s warning that there is no way within
the upper bound constraint of 100% muscle activation that the model can
recruit the muscles; they are simply not strong enough to carry the
external load. AnyBody’s reaction is to change to another recruitment
algorithm that is capable of handling overloaded muscles in the time
steps when the Quadratic algorithm cannot handle the case within its
bounds. We are going to return to this algorithm, the MinMax algorithm,
in more detail later in this tutorial. For now, it suffices to say that
the solution of the MinMax algorithm and the Quadratic algorithm with
upper bounds is the same at the single point where the organism is
exactly 100% loaded. The points where the shift between the algorithms
take place are clearly identifiable as the points where the envelope of
muscle activation exceeds 1.

It is important to emphasize that muscle activation beyond 1 is not
physiological, so it might have made sense for AnyBody not to return a
solution at all. But that would not have been very helpful. It would
leave the user with no clue about why the organism is overloaded or how
much. The method you see here allows the user to investigate the problem
and make the necessary changes to the model or at least quantify its
overloaded.

There are properties of the quadratic algorithm, however, that are
somewhat unsatisfactory: While it requires the upper bounds to extract
the maximum strength from the organism, the same upper bounds tend to
produce activation curves with kinks that seem to leave a
non-physiological impression. It seems like the key to avoiding this
would be to get the muscles to be more synergistic. How that might be
done is the topic of {doc}`lesson4`.
:::
